Producer/consumer pipelines with System.Threading.Channels (#290)
maartenba/maartenba.github.io: _posts/2020-08-26-producer-consumer-pipelines-with-system-threading-channels.markdown

---
layout: post
title: "Producer/consumer pipelines with System.Threading.Channels"
date: 2020-08-26 03:44:05 +0100
comments: true
published: true
categories: ["post"]
tags: ["General", "ICT", ".NET", ".NET Core", "Threading", "Performance"]
author: Maarten Balliauw
---

> Last week, I came across the following question: "Is there an async producer consumer collection these days in .NET?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last week, I came across the following question: "Is there an async producer/consumer collection these days in .NET?"
```

Why yes, there is! Using `System.Threading.Channels`, we can create producer/consumer pairs,
and we can even chain them together in a pipeline.

> Many people seem to know about `System.Threading.Channels`, including the person who asked the original question.

Reviewer: This line is confusing, do the people `know` or `don't know`?

The interesting thing is that few think of it when they might need it.

> In this post, I will try to explain some concurrency, producer/consumer and `System.Threading.Channels`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, I will try to explain concurrency, producer/consumer, and `System.Threading.Channels`
```

    if (frontMatter == null) continue;

    var cardImage = await generator.CreateImageAsync(frontMatter);

    await generator.SaveImageAsync(cardImage, Path.GetFileNameWithoutExtension(postPath) + ".png");
}
```

If all goes well, I should get a directory filled with Twitter cards for all of my blog posts, images like this:

[![Example Twitter card](/images/cards/2020-04-14-building-an-aspnet-core-tag-helper-to-show-hide-ui-elements-based-on-authorization.markdown.png)](/post/2020/04/14/building-an-aspnet-core-tag-helper-to-show-hide-ui-elements-based-on-authorization.html)

We're done here, right? Well, yes and no...

## Concurrency and `async`/`await`

The above code is quite slow, taking a good 45 seconds to generate all Twitter cards. It would be good if we could speed
it up with some added concurrency. `ReadFrontMatterAsync()` is I/O-bound (reading from disk), while `CreateImageAsync()`
is CPU-bound (generating an image and calculating stuff).

Ideally, we would run these tasks concurrently so that while we're waiting for the filesystem to give us back data, we can
run the necessary calculations to generate an image.

> Remember when everyone told you to use `async`/`await` so code could run concurrently? That's still good advice, except
> you don't get concurrency automatically. Even though the example above is using `await ...`, there will always be just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember when everyone told you to use `async`/`await` so code could run concurrently? **That's still good advice, except
you don't get concurrency automatically**. Even though the example above is using `await ...`, there will always be just
```

one task that is scheduled to execute.

Here's what the Parallel Stacks (in [Rider](https://www.jetbrains.com/rider/)) show when we pause on a breakpoint in `SaveImageAsync()`:

![Parallel Stacks showing tasks are not scheduled concurrently](/images/2020/08/not-concurrent-parallel-stacks.png)

> In frameworks like ASP.NET Core, the framework itself schedules our controllers, pages, actions and whatnot, concurrently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In frameworks like ASP.NET Core, the framework itself schedules elements of the request pipeline concurrently.
```

In this example, it looks like we're on our own...

What can we do to run these tasks concurrently? One approach could be to schedule our tasks like this:

```csharp
var generator = new ThumbnailGenerator();
var tasks = new List<Task>();
var postPaths = Directory.GetFiles(Constants.PostsDirectory);
foreach (var postPath in postPaths)
{
    tasks.Add(new Func<Task>(async () =>
    {
        var frontMatter = await generator.ReadFrontMatterAsync(postPath);
        if (frontMatter == null) return;

        var cardImage = await generator.CreateImageAsync(frontMatter);

>         await generator.SaveImageAsync(cardImage, Path.GetFileNameWithoutExtension(postPath) + ".png");

Reviewer: `Path.ChangeExtension(postPath, "png")`

Author: Unfortunately not (discussed in Space)

* Similar to our previous producer, we `TryComplete()` the `frontMatterChannel` to let the next consumer know there will not be new data coming.

For every step, we'll do something like the above. There are some good [examples of producer/consumer patterns](https://github.com/dotnet/corefxlab/blob/31d98a89d2e38f786303bf1e9f8ba4cf5b203b0f/src/System.Threading.Tasks.Channels/README.md#example-producerconsumer-patterns) in the .NET Core GitHub repo.

If you want to have a look at the full implementation, [it's available on GitHub](https://github.com/maartenba/ChannelsExample).

We're done, right? Well, yes and no...

## Hello, `Open.ChannelExtensions`!

After writing a few pipelines of producers/consumers, the channel setup, writing, completion, ... becomes cumbersome rather quickly.

This is where [`Open.ChannelExtensions`](https://github.com/Open-NET-Libraries/Open.ChannelExtensions) comes in. It helps simplify

> working with `System.Threading.Channels`. It can read from and write to channels, pipe channels nto other channels, filter, batch, join, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
working with `System.Threading.Channels`. It can read from and write to channels, pipe channels into other channels, filter, batch, join, and more.
```

* Both concurrency (how many tasks should be used for a consumer/producer?) and capacity (how many messages to buffer?) can be controlled. Using these we can control the way our pipeline behaves.

## Conclusion

The original, procedural version of our code took 45 seconds to execute. The channels version takes 22 seconds. So what changed?

Using `System.Threading.Channels`, we ensure concurrency of different kinds of workloads:

* `ReadFrontMatterAsync()` is I/O-bound (reading from disk), and mostly waits for the filesystem
* `CreateImageAsync()` is CPU-bound (generating an image and calculating stuff), and requires memory and CPU cycles

Concurrent execution does not necessarily mean parallelism! We're using `async`/`await` and channels to make it easier for
the task scheduler in .NET to shuffle our tasks around. The default `ThreadPoolTaskScheduler` will use threadpool threads,
and thus, run our code in parallel, but that's an implementation detail. We are merely splitting our application's workload,
so it can wait for I/O and consume CPU at the same time.

> Bounded and unbounded channels exist, and can help us control how many messages fit on our channel, to make sure we don't
> exhaust memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bounded and unbounded channels exist and can help us control how many messages fit on our channel, to make sure we don't exhaust memory.**
```
